SHAHINA
Experimental Nuclear Astrophysicist

Postdoctoral Research Associate, Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

shahina@psfc.mit.edu — +1(574)386-5699 — Cambridge, MA 02139

ACADEMIC APPOINTMENTS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Plasma Science and Fusion Center Jan. 2025–Present
Postdoctoral Research Associate
High-energy-density plasma physics, fusion diagnostics, and nuclear cross-section measurements.
University of Notre Dame, Department of Physics and Astronomy Aug. 2018–Apr. 2024
Graduate Research Assistant
EDUCATION
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 2018–2024
Ph.D., Physics and Astronomy
Dissertation: Stellar neutron sources for the s-process nucleosynthesis
Advisor: Prof. Michael Wiescher
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 2018–2020
M.S., Physics and Astronomy
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Mohali, India 2017–2018
M.S., Physics
Thesis: Air-shower Multi-Mesh Proportional Counter
Advisor: Prof. Satyajit Jena
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Mohali, India 2013–2017
B.S., Physics
RESEARCH INTERESTS
My research interests lie in low-energy nuclear physics, high-energy-density plasma physics, detector development,
and computational analysis to measure nuclear reactions that govern stellar evolution and nucleosynthesis.
• Experimental nuclear astrophysics: Direct measurements of radiative-capture and (α, n) reactions relevant
to the slow and rapid neutron capture process, the Carbon-Nitrogen-Oxygen (CNO) cycle in Sun, and stellar
evolution.

• High-energy-density plasma nuclear science: Development of plasma platforms and diagnostics for nuclear-
reaction measurements at OMEGA, the Z machine, and the National Ignition Facility.

• Detector development and neutron spectroscopy: Neutron, gamma-ray, charged-particle, and CR-39 based
detection methods for accelerator-based cross-section measurements.
• Reaction modeling and data analysis: R-matrix and Hauser-Feshbach analyses, MESA stellar-evolution code,
Monte Carlo particle transport, and machine-learning methods for nuclear data analysis and neutron-spectrum
unfolding.
CORE EXPERTISE
Neutron spectroscopy and unfolding (MLEM, Bayesian inference) • Gamma-ray and charged-particle detection
(HECTOR, CR-39, scintillators) • Accelerator-based nuclear experiments (CASPAR, LEIA) • High-energy-density
plasma diagnostics (OMEGA, NIF, Z) • Monte Carlo transport and nuclear data (MCNP/OpenMC, Geant4,
ENDF).
PUBLICATIONS
Manuscripts submitted and in preparation
1. Advancing the MIT Linear Electrostatic Ion Accelerator (LEIA) used for developing diagnostics for OMEGA, Z
and NIF for fusion cross-section measurements
Shahina, T. Evans, K. Bauer, B.I. Buschmann, M. Cufari, S. Dannhoff, A. DeVault, E. Edwards, B. Foo, N.
Keer, Y. Lawrence, C. Shuldberg, N. Vanderloo, J. Vargas, C. Wink, J.A. Frenje, and M. Gatu Johnson.
Submitted to Review of Scientific Instruments.